README.md, before:

# Celona
A customizable, modern status bar and desktop UI built with Quickshell and Qt/QML. Celona focuses on practical ergonomics, clean visuals, and tight integration with common Wayland environments such as Niri and Hyprland.

Celona ships a collection of self-contained bar modules (blocks), a setup UI, and helper scripts to streamline daily workflows.

## Demo
![screenshot](https://github.com/myinqi/Celona/blob/main/demo/screenshot.png)

## Highlights

- Minimal, readable design with keyboard-first workflows
- Dynamic workspaces and window awareness (Niri, Hyprland)
- Theme system with Matugen integration (auto-palette from wallpaper)
- Light/Dark mode switching that also syncs external apps
- Sensible defaults with a single JSON configuration file
- Extensible QML-based modules and clean code structure

## Project Structure

Key paths in this repository:

- `shell.qml` – entry point for Quickshell
- `bar/` – the status bar and its modules ("blocks")
  - `blocks/` – individual modules (Clipboard, InfoKeybinds, WindowSelector, etc.)
  - `blocks/setup/` – setup pages (Theme, Wallpapers, etc.)
- `scripts/` – helper scripts used by modules and setup pages
- `config.json` – primary configuration file for Celona
- `colors.css` – Matugen-generated palette (auto-generated)
- `Globals.qml` – project-wide state, theme handling, and integrations


## Installation (script installer)

To work properly please install a fresh CachyOS system (without desktop environment). 
Btrfs is recommended, but not needed. For Btrfs the installer creates a snapshot of the system before the installation.
Fish shell configuration required!
You can deselect the zsh configuration, we do not need it
You can deselect the Firefox configuration, we use zen-browser with Celona
After installation log into system and perform the next steps:

- The Celona repository must already exist at `~/.config/quickshell/Celona/`. So clone the repository first. 
    ```
    mkdir -p ~/.config/quickshell
    git clone https://github.com/myinqi/Celona.git ~/.config/quickshell/Celona
    fish ~/.config/quickshell/Celona/install.fish
    ```
- after installation reboot your system
- final configuration of your hardware:
      micro ~/.config/niri/config.kdl
      on line 9 set your prefered keyboard layout again "us" "de" ...
      on line 54 set your resolution and refresh rate. In my case mode "3440x1440@165.030" but yours is maybe "1920x1080@60.030"
      on line 79 set your max horizontal resulutions minus some pixels. I chosse -20 pixel
      save and exit Ctrl+S Ctrl+Q
      if you cant to customize edit the hyprgreetr config -> micro ~/.config/hyprgreetr/config.toml

## Installation (manual, step by step)

1) Niri: follow the detailed steps in the manual_installation.txt file (this file describes the installation on a fresh CachyOS system)

2) Hyprland: also follow the detailed steps in the manual_installation.txt file (just add hyprland to line 65, you can have both niri and hyprland if you wish to switch between them)

Important: the manual_installation.txt describes the installation for a fresh installation with CachyOS. If you have a different Linux distribution, you can follow the steps in the manual_installation.txt file, but you will need to install the dependencies yourself. 

## Requirements

- Arch based Linux I tested it on CachyOS
- Fish shell
- Quickshell (Wayland widget engine)
- Qt/QML (via Quickshell runtime)
- For integrations and scripts:
  - `matugen` (theme palette generator)
  - `jq` (JSON tooling)
  - `ffmpeg` (optional; first-frame extraction from animated wallpapers)
  - `swww` or your configured wallpaper tool (optional)
  - `wl-clipboard` (`wl-copy`/`wl-paste`) and `cliphist` for the Clipboard module
  - `ghostty` (optional; theme sync)
  - `fuzzel` (optional; theme sync)
  - `swaync` (optional; theme sync)
  - `cava` (optional; theme sync)
  - `nwg-look` (optional; theme sync)
  - `kvantum` (optional; theme sync)
  - `mpvpaper` (optional; animated wallpapers)
  - `hyprgreetr`, `hyprlock` (optional; theme sync)
  - `niri` or `hyprland` 

Most optional dependencies are used only if present and configured.


## Configuration

The primary configuration file is `config.json` in the repository root. It holds paths and feature flags that modules and setup pages read at runtime. 
to be set by the user:
- `keybindsPath` – path to keybinds file; supports Hyprland `.conf` or Niri `.kdl`
- `weatherLocation` – your location for the weather module
- `weatherUnit` – the unit of the weather module (C or F)
- `DockItems` – custom items for the dock module (if you use a dock)
All other settings are handled by the setup UI (Gear-Icon in the left corner of the bar).

Wallpapers: I added some sample wallpapers in the Repo, search for your screen resolution folder and apply them via the Wallpapers Setup Page.
Animated wallpapers: if you wish to use your own animated wallpapers, in the repo is a script to extract the first frame from the animated wallpaper and use it as static wallpaper. (scripts/extract-first-frame.sh)
If no static wallpaper is set but you choose an animated one - you can use the matugen option, Celona creates a temp static wallpaper and uses this for the color generation. But this is only a backup, you should use the script to create a proper static wallpaper.

When theme settings are changed via the setup UI, the updated values are persisted to `config.json` by `Globals.saveTheme()`.

## Theming and Light/Dark Toggle

Celona integrates with Matugen to derive a color palette from your wallpaper.

- The Theme page (Setup) exposes a "Use Matugen colors" toggle and a "Theme Mode" button.
- The button runs `scripts/matugen-toggle.sh`, which:
  - Chooses a source image (static wallpaper or first frame from animated video)
  - Generates `colors.css` for the selected mode (`light`/`dark`)
  - Updates the system GTK color scheme via `gsettings`
  - Optionally updates the Qt (Kvantum) theme via `scripts/qt-kvantum-mode.sh` if present
  - Persists the selected mode under `~/.config/quickshell/Celona/matugen_mode`
  - After generation, Celona loads and applies the palette, updates bar colors, and synchronizes optional integrations:
  - Niri active/inactive colors (`~/.config/niri/config.kdl`)
  - Ghostty (`~/.config/ghostty/themes/matugen_colors.conf` + live OSC script)
  - Fuzzel (`~/.config/fuzzel/themes/matugen_colors.ini`)
  - Hyprgreetr, Hyprlock, Cava, SwayNC (respective config files)


Default themes can be overridden via environment variables when launching Quickshell:

```sh
LIGHT_THEME=KvGlassWhite DARK_THEME=KvGlass quickshell --config ~/.config/quickshell/Celona
```

Celona will call the helper with `light` or `dark`.

## Modules

The following modules live under `bar/blocks/`. Unless noted otherwise, each item is a single QML file with its own inline popup and relies on `Globals.qml` theme colors. All popups cooperate via a global popup context so only one is visible at a time. Many modules use the adaptive accent color `Globals.visualizerBarColorEffective` so visuals remain readable on light and dark themes.

- `ActiveWorkspace.qml` — compact indicator for the currently focused workspace.
- `Barvisualizer.qml` — compact audio bar visualizer. Reacts to theme changes (`Globals.themeEpoch`) and uses the adaptive accent color `Globals.visualizerBarColorEffective` for proper contrast on light/dark themes. Tooltip shows "Now Playing" with a smooth ping‑pong marquee when the title is long.
- `Battery.qml` — battery status and popup details.
- `Bluetooth.qml` — Bluetooth indicator and quick actions (if supported on the system).
- `Brightness.qml` — Brightness indicator and quick actions (if supported on the system).
- `CPU.qml` — CPU usage indicator.
- `Clipboard.qml` — clipboard history via `cliphist` and `wl-clipboard`; left‑click shows entries, right‑click offers management actions.
- `Date.qml` — date display.
- `GPU.qml` — GPU usage indicator.
- `InfoKeybinds.qml` — keybinds cheatsheet.
  - Hyprland: parses `.conf`.
  - Niri: parses `config.kdl` (`binds { ... }` and `binding { ... }`). Set `keybindsPath` in `config.json`.
- `Memory.qml` — memory usage indicator.
- `Network.qml` — network status indicator.
- `Notifications.qml` — unread notifications indicator (if supported in your environment).
- `Power.qml` — power menu actions (shutdown, reboot, etc.).
- `PowerProfiles.qml` — power profiles toggle/indicator, if available.
- `Setup.qml` — entry to the setup dialog (gear icon) to manage theme and behavior.
- `SetupDialog.qml` — wrapper dialog for setup pages.
- `Sound.qml` — volume and sink/source controls with a popup. Includes an embedded Cava visualizer that robustly restarts on theme changes. Uses `Globals.visualizerBarColorEffective` for the bar color.
- `SystemTray.qml` — system tray area for compatible tray icons.
- `Time.qml` — time display.
- `Updates.qml` — system/package update indicator.
- `Weather.qml` — weather info (optional; requires network access and configuration).
- `Welcome.qml` — welcome message and hints area.
- `WindowSelector.qml` — lists open windows; supports Niri (`niri msg -j windows/workspaces`) and Hyprland. Dynamic height with a scrollbar; app glyphs and workspace numbers use the adaptive accent color. Focus actions call the corresponding compositor commands.
- `WindowTitle.qml` — shows the active window title.
- `Workspaces.qml` — workspace strip with active/inactive visuals.
- `MediaControls.qml` — Previous / Play‑Pause / Next buttons. Color follows `Barvisualizer` (adaptive accent color). Visibility can be toggled in the Modules setup page.

### Setup pages (bar/blocks/setup/)

- `DockPage.qml` — dock configuration (position, size, behavior, colors).
- `LayoutPage.qml` — bar layout, positions, margins, and visibility.
- `ModulesPage.qml` — toggle available modules on/off and ordering.
- `SystemPage.qml` — system integration settings.
- `ThemePage.qml` — Matugen, theme colors, and Light/Dark mode switch.
- `WallpapersPage.qml` — static/animated wallpaper configuration and tools.

Modules register with a global popup context to ensure only one popup is visible at a time.

## Usage Tips

- Hover and click bar modules to open their popups.
- Use the Setup gear to adjust your personal settings.
- Windowskey+G hides the bar, stops the animated background, and unloads all modules, use this feature for gaming or intensive fullscreen applications. Windowskey+G again shows the bar and restarts the animated background.
- For the Keybinds module, set `keybindsPath` to your Hyprland or Niri configuration file. For Niri, pointing to `~/.config/niri/config.kdl` enables direct parsing from the `binds` block.

## Development

- Code style: QML + small helper scripts (bash). Keep modules self-contained.
- Popups should respect `Globals.popupContext` to maintain mutual exclusivity.
- Prefer non-destructive file updates for external integrations and validate file availability before writing.
- Use `console.log` with clear prefixes per module to aid debugging.
- I included all my configuration files in the repository to create a good "out of the box" experience. Just follow the steps in the installation.txt file. Recommendation: use it on a fresh CachyOS installation.

### Running locally

```sh
quickshell --config ~/.config/quickshell/Celona
```

### Logs

Quickshell prints log locations on startup. You can tail them as needed:

```sh
tail -f /run/user/$(id -u)/quickshell/by-id/*/log.qslog
```

## Troubleshooting

- If Matugen changes are not reflected, ensure `colors.css` exists and that `Globals.useMatugenColors` is enabled. Use the matugen config provided in the .config folder of this repository.
- If the Light/Dark toggle fails, verify the wallpaper paths and that `matugen`, `jq`, and optionally `ffmpeg` are installed.
- If Qt apps do not reflect the theme, confirm `scripts/qt-kvantum-mode.sh` is executable and you are using Kvantum.
- For Niri integrations, verify that `~/.config/niri/config.kdl` is readable and that `niri msg` commands are available.

## known bugs:

- sometines (extremlly rare) if you apply now wallpapers the color of your niri borders will not be updated on the fly. Solution: switch theme from dark to light and back to trigger matugen.

## Credits

- CachyOS, Niri, quickshell, matugen, mpvpaper, ghostty, hyprland, fuzzel,hyprlock, swaync, cava developers and many other developers for their work on their respective projects.
- For animated wallpapers: ailivewallpapers.com
- wimpysworld (https://github.com/wimpysworld) for his emoji and color picker scripts. Took a lot of inspiration from his work.

## License

This project is released under the MIT License.

Commit message:

sddm face icon can now be set in the settings menu

README.md, after:

# Celona
A customizable, modern status bar and desktop UI built with Quickshell and Qt/QML. Celona focuses on practical ergonomics, clean visuals, and tight integration with common Wayland environments such as Niri and Hyprland.

Celona ships a collection of self-contained bar modules (blocks), a setup UI, and helper scripts to streamline daily workflows.

## Demo
![screenshot](https://github.com/myinqi/Celona/blob/main/demo/screenshot.png)

## Highlights

- Minimal, readable design with keyboard-first workflows
- Dynamic workspaces and window awareness (Niri, Hyprland)
- Theme system with Matugen integration (auto-palette from wallpaper)
- Light/Dark mode switching that also syncs external apps
- Sensible defaults with a single JSON configuration file
- Extensible QML-based modules and clean code structure

## Project Structure

Key paths in this repository:

- `shell.qml` – entry point for Quickshell
- `bar/` – the status bar and its modules ("blocks")
  - `blocks/` – individual modules (Clipboard, InfoKeybinds, WindowSelector, etc.)
  - `blocks/setup/` – setup pages (Theme, Wallpapers, etc.)
- `scripts/` – helper scripts used by modules and setup pages
- `config.json` – primary configuration file for Celona
- `colors.css` – Matugen-generated palette (auto-generated)
- `Globals.qml` – project-wide state, theme handling, and integrations


## Installation (script installer)

To work properly please install a fresh CachyOS system (without desktop environment). 
Btrfs is recommended, but not needed. For Btrfs the installer creates a snapshot of the system before the installation.
Fish shell configuration required!
You can deselect the zsh configuration, we do not need it
You can deselect the Firefox configuration, we use zen-browser with Celona
After installation log into system and perform the next steps:

- The Celona repository must already exist at `~/.config/quickshell/Celona/`. So clone the repository first. 
    ```
    mkdir -p ~/.config/quickshell
    git clone https://github.com/myinqi/Celona.git ~/.config/quickshell/Celona
    fish ~/.config/quickshell/Celona/install.fish
    ```
- after installation reboot your system
- final configuration of your hardware:
      micro ~/.config/niri/config.kdl
      on line 9 set your prefered keyboard layout again "us" "de" ...
      on line 54 set your resolution and refresh rate. In my case mode "3440x1440@165.030" but yours is maybe "1920x1080@60.030"
      on line 79 set your max horizontal resulutions minus some pixels. I chosse -20 pixel
      save and exit Ctrl+S Ctrl+Q
      if you cant to customize edit the hyprgreetr config -> micro ~/.config/hyprgreetr/config.toml

## Installation (manual, step by step)

1) Niri: follow the detailed steps in the manual_installation.txt file (this file describes the installation on a fresh CachyOS system)

2) Hyprland: also follow the detailed steps in the manual_installation.txt file (just add hyprland to line 65, you can have both niri and hyprland if you wish to switch between them)

Important: the manual_installation.txt describes the installation for a fresh installation with CachyOS. If you have a different Linux distribution, you can follow the steps in the manual_installation.txt file, but you will need to install the dependencies yourself. 

## Requirements

- Arch based Linux I tested it on CachyOS
- Fish shell
- Quickshell (Wayland widget engine)
- Qt/QML (via Quickshell runtime)
- For integrations and scripts:
  - `matugen` (theme palette generator)
  - `jq` (JSON tooling)
  - `ffmpeg` (optional; first-frame extraction from animated wallpapers)
  - `swww` or your configured wallpaper tool (optional)
  - `wl-clipboard` (`wl-copy`/`wl-paste`) and `cliphist` for the Clipboard module
  - `ghostty` (optional; theme sync)
  - `fuzzel` (optional; theme sync)
  - `swaync` (optional; theme sync)
  - `cava` (optional; theme sync)
  - `nwg-look` (optional; theme sync)
  - `kvantum` (optional; theme sync)
  - `mpvpaper` (optional; animated wallpapers)
  - `hyprgreetr`, `hyprlock` (optional; theme sync)
  - `niri` or `hyprland` 

Most optional dependencies are used only if present and configured.


## Configuration

The primary configuration file is `config.json` in the repository root. It holds paths and feature flags that modules and setup pages read at runtime. 
to be set by the user:
- `keybindsPath` – path to keybinds file; supports Hyprland `.conf` or Niri `.kdl`
- `weatherLocation` – your location for the weather module
- `weatherUnit` – the unit of the weather module (C or F)
- `DockItems` – custom items for the dock module (if you use a dock)
All other settings are handled by the setup UI (Gear-Icon in the left corner of the bar).

Wallpapers: I added some sample wallpapers in the Repo, search for your screen resolution folder and apply them via the Wallpapers Setup Page.
Animated wallpapers: if you wish to use your own animated wallpapers, in the repo is a script to extract the first frame from the animated wallpaper and use it as static wallpaper. (scripts/extract-first-frame.sh)
If no static wallpaper is set but you choose an animated one - you can use the matugen option, Celona creates a temp static wallpaper and uses this for the color generation. But this is only a backup, you should use the script to create a proper static wallpaper.

When theme settings are changed via the setup UI, the updated values are persisted to `config.json` by `Globals.saveTheme()`.

## Theming and Light/Dark Toggle

Celona integrates with Matugen to derive a color palette from your wallpaper.

- The Theme page (Setup) exposes a "Use Matugen colors" toggle and a "Theme Mode" button.
- The button runs `scripts/matugen-toggle.sh`, which:
  - Chooses a source image (static wallpaper or first frame from animated video)
  - Generates `colors.css` for the selected mode (`light`/`dark`)
  - Updates the system GTK color scheme via `gsettings`
  - Optionally updates the Qt (Kvantum) theme via `scripts/qt-kvantum-mode.sh` if present
  - Persists the selected mode under `~/.config/quickshell/Celona/matugen_mode`
  - After generation, Celona loads and applies the palette, updates bar colors, and synchronizes optional integrations:
  - Niri active/inactive colors (`~/.config/niri/config.kdl`)
  - Ghostty (`~/.config/ghostty/themes/matugen_colors.conf` + live OSC script)
  - Fuzzel (`~/.config/fuzzel/themes/matugen_colors.ini`)
  - Hyprgreetr, Hyprlock, Cava, SwayNC (respective config files)


Default themes can be overridden via environment variables when launching Quickshell:

```sh
LIGHT_THEME=KvGlassWhite DARK_THEME=KvGlass quickshell --config ~/.config/quickshell/Celona
```

Celona will call the helper with `light` or `dark`.

## Modules

The following modules live under `bar/blocks/`. Unless noted otherwise, each item is a single QML file with its own inline popup and relies on `Globals.qml` theme colors. All popups cooperate via a global popup context so only one is visible at a time. Many modules use the adaptive accent color `Globals.visualizerBarColorEffective` so visuals remain readable on light and dark themes.

- `ActiveWorkspace.qml` — compact indicator for the currently focused workspace.
- `Barvisualizer.qml` — compact audio bar visualizer. Reacts to theme changes (`Globals.themeEpoch`) and uses the adaptive accent color `Globals.visualizerBarColorEffective` for proper contrast on light/dark themes. Tooltip shows "Now Playing" with a smooth ping‑pong marquee when the title is long.
- `Battery.qml` — battery status and popup details.
- `Bluetooth.qml` — Bluetooth indicator and quick actions (if supported on the system).
- `Brightness.qml` — Brightness indicator and quick actions (if supported on the system).
- `CPU.qml` — CPU usage indicator.
- `Clipboard.qml` — clipboard history via `cliphist` and `wl-clipboard`; left‑click shows entries, right‑click offers management actions.
- `Date.qml` — date display.
- `GPU.qml` — GPU usage indicator.
- `InfoKeybinds.qml` — keybinds cheatsheet.
  - Hyprland: parses `.conf`.
  - Niri: parses `config.kdl` (`binds { ... }` and `binding { ... }`). Set `keybindsPath` in `config.json`.
- `Memory.qml` — memory usage indicator.
- `Network.qml` — network status indicator.
- `Notifications.qml` — unread notifications indicator (if supported in your environment).
- `Power.qml` — power menu actions (shutdown, reboot, etc.).
- `PowerProfiles.qml` — power profiles toggle/indicator, if available.
- `Setup.qml` — entry to the setup dialog (gear icon) to manage theme and behavior.
- `SetupDialog.qml` — wrapper dialog for setup pages.
- `Sound.qml` — volume and sink/source controls with a popup. Includes an embedded Cava visualizer that robustly restarts on theme changes. Uses `Globals.visualizerBarColorEffective` for the bar color.
- `SystemTray.qml` — system tray area for compatible tray icons.
- `Time.qml` — time display.
- `Updates.qml` — system/package update indicator.
- `Weather.qml` — weather info (optional; requires network access and configuration).
- `Welcome.qml` — welcome message and hints area.
- `WindowSelector.qml` — lists open windows; supports Niri (`niri msg -j windows/workspaces`) and Hyprland. Dynamic height with a scrollbar; app glyphs and workspace numbers use the adaptive accent color. Focus actions call the corresponding compositor commands.
- `WindowTitle.qml` — shows the active window title.
- `Workspaces.qml` — workspace strip with active/inactive visuals.
- `MediaControls.qml` — Previous / Play‑Pause / Next buttons. Color follows `Barvisualizer` (adaptive accent color). Visibility can be toggled in the Modules setup page.

### Setup pages (bar/blocks/setup/)

- `DockPage.qml` — dock configuration (position, size, behavior, colors).
- `LayoutPage.qml` — bar layout, positions, margins, and visibility.
- `ModulesPage.qml` — toggle available modules on/off and ordering.
- `SystemPage.qml` — system integration settings.
- `ThemePage.qml` — Matugen, theme colors, and Light/Dark mode switch.
- `WallpapersPage.qml` — static/animated wallpaper configuration and tools.

Modules register with a global popup context to ensure only one popup is visible at a time.

## Usage Tips

- Check out the Settings page (gear icon in the left corner of the bar) to customize your Celona experience.
- Hover and click bar modules to open their popups.
- Use the Setup gear to adjust your personal settings.
- Windowskey+G hides the bar, stops the animated background, and unloads all modules, use this feature for gaming or intensive fullscreen applications. Windowskey+G again shows the bar and restarts the animated background.

## Development

- Code style: QML + small helper scripts (bash). Keep modules self-contained.
- Popups should respect `Globals.popupContext` to maintain mutual exclusivity.
- Prefer non-destructive file updates for external integrations and validate file availability before writing.
- Use `console.log` with clear prefixes per module to aid debugging.
- I included all my configuration files in the repository to create a good "out of the box" experience. Just follow the steps in the installation.txt file. Recommendation: use it on a fresh CachyOS installation.

### Running locally

```sh
quickshell --config ~/.config/quickshell/Celona
```

### Logs

Quickshell prints log locations on startup. You can tail them as needed:

```sh
tail -f /run/user/$(id -u)/quickshell/by-id/*/log.qslog
```

## Troubleshooting

- If Matugen changes are not reflected, ensure `colors.css` exists and that `Globals.useMatugenColors` is enabled. Use the matugen config provided in the .config folder of this repository.
- If the Light/Dark toggle fails, verify the wallpaper paths and that `matugen`, `jq`, and optionally `ffmpeg` are installed.
- If Qt apps do not reflect the theme, confirm `scripts/qt-kvantum-mode.sh` is executable and you are using Kvantum.
- For Niri integrations, verify that `~/.config/niri/config.kdl` is readable and that `niri msg` commands are available.

## known bugs:

- sometines (extremlly rare) if you apply now wallpapers the color of your niri borders will not be updated on the fly. Solution: switch theme from dark to light and back to trigger matugen.

## Credits

- CachyOS, Niri, quickshell, matugen, mpvpaper, ghostty, hyprland, fuzzel,hyprlock, swaync, cava developers and many other developers for their work on their respective projects.
- For animated wallpapers: ailivewallpapers.com
- wimpysworld (https://github.com/wimpysworld) for his emoji and color picker scripts. Took a lot of inspiration from his work.

## License

This project is released under the MIT License.
